Journey into sleep

An illustrated tour of why scientists are finding that sleep matters more than we know.
By Nancy Lapid, Simon Scarr, Adolfo Arranz, Jackie Gu and Caitlin Gilbert
Published April 8, 2023
Doctors are increasingly waking up to the idea that getting enough sleep is crucial. In 2022, the American Heart Association advised physicians that asking patients how many hours they sleep is as important as checking their blood pressure, smoking status, diet and exercise habits.

But many of us routinely force our bodies to fight sleep. We drink caffeinated beverages by day to stay alert and alcohol to wind down at night. Some of us work all night and sleep in daylight. Others switch time zones and struggle with jet lag.

At the same time, neuroscientists are realizing that the timing of our sleep may be just as important as the amount. We are beginning to understand how we might work with, rather than against, the rhythms of our bodies. For example, new research suggests these rhythms may play a role in patients’ responses to cancer treatment.

We have clocks in our brains and cells
For millions of years, humans have experienced a consistent pattern of light exposure, with minimal day-to-day variability in the timing of sunset and sunrise. So our genes prepared us to be active in daylight and rest after nightfall.

In 1959, physician Franz Halberg was the first to document our roughly 24-hour self-regulating systems – that he called circadian rhythms – from the Latin words for ‘about’ and ‘day.’ In 2017, three scientists won a Nobel Prize for showing that humans have a network of timekeeping genes and proteins with daily cycles of rest and activity.

These ‘molecular clocks’ in our brain and in every cell modulate our body systems, including hormones, blood pressure, blood glucose and body temperature.

One circadian loop: We are genetically programmed to be hungrier in the evening, which helps us load up on calories before the overnight fast, and less hungry early in the morning, so we can use our energy reserves to go out and hunt for our next meal.

The loop for sleep balances the ‘sleep drive’ with the need to be awake. When we've been awake for a long time, our sleep drive kicks in and tells us we need to sleep.

People whose lives are synchronized with their body clock signals are less fatigued, have better moods, maintain healthier weights, gain more benefit from their medications, think more clearly, and have improved long-term health outcomes, said neuroscientist Russell Foster, who heads the Sleep and Circadian Neuroscience Institute at Oxford University in the UK.
The circadian clock
The body’s circadian rhythm runs about 24 hours. Primarily regulated by light and darkness, the cycle affects various parts of the body differently
In humans, here’s how a typical day looks.
Organs
The circadian clock keeps our organs operating at peak performance at the right time of day. Certain organs, like the kidneys, function best during the day, whereas nighttime is most important for the brain.
Kidneys and bladder
Waste filtration is highest during the day and lowest at night. Kidney hormones that help regulate blood pressure and red blood cell production also follow a daily rhythm.
Muscles
The cell activities that are important for physical performance, muscle growth and repair peak during the day and dip at night.
Fat cells
In the evening the cells focus on storing fat. In the morning the emphasis is on breaking down fat and producing anti-inflammatory hormones.
Skin
The skin’s ability to regenerate and respond to stress follows a circadian rhythm. Injuries incurred at night heal slower than those you get during the day.
Adrenal glands
These produce hormones that are critical in regulating the body’s stress responses and other important chemical processes. Disruptions to their circadian rhythm can upset that process
Brain
The brain releases the hormone melatonin to help regulate the sleep-wake cycle. Inside it, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland help raise stress hormone levels in the morning to boost alertness; they also help stimulate glucose production, providing energy for the day.
Immune system
Different functions peak at night and in daytime, so disruptions to the circadian rhythm impair the immune response. Doctors recently linked long COVID with circadian rhythm sleep/wake disorders.
Cardiovascular system
Blood pressure, heart rate and breathing rate are highest during the day and lowest at night. Our production of red blood cells and hemoglobin, the protein that carries oxygen, also peaks in the daytime.
Digestive system
Release of digestive enzymes is highest by day. To keep blood sugar from getting too high, insulin production in the pancreas peaks in the morning. At night, the pancreas releases more glucagon so blood sugar does not fall too low. Our muscles’ work moving food through the intestines, and the liver’s detoxification of harmful substances, also follow diurnal patterns.
Naturally early risers, or morning ‘larks,’ do best when they can wake up early and sleep early. ‘Night owls’ do best if they can sleep until later in the morning.

But when our routines don’t match our biological cycles, the body tries to compensate using responses that evolved to help early humans survive danger, neuroscientist Foster said. It churns out stress hormones, releases hunger hormones, pumps extra sugar into the blood, and raises blood pressure.

For brief periods, this is not harmful. But when it lasts months or years, we become more vulnerable to cognitive and emotional effects and eventually to cardiovascular diseases, mental illness, diabetes, overweight, and other metabolic disorders, Foster said.

Other studies suggest we also face higher odds for divorce and road accidents.

It’s been estimated that more than half the population in industrialized societies may have circadian rhythms that are out of sync with their schedules. Globally, an estimated one in five workers does regular night shift work, according to a 2020 study by the International Agency for Research on Cancer.

Circadian rhythms shift with age. ‘Eveningness,’ or peak alertness at night, tends to be highest in adolescence. We drift toward ‘morningness’ as we age. One consequence of this is that teachers are generally more alert in the morning, but their students are more alert in the afternoon.

A 2016 Rand Corporation report calculated that an employee who works irregular hours, commutes 30 to 60 minutes each way, and faces unrealistic time pressures at work sleeps on average about 28.5 minutes per day less than an employee who has regular working hours, commutes no more than 15 minutes one way, and is not exposed to unrealistic time pressure and other psychosocial risk factors at work.

This equates to over 173 hours of lost sleep per year.

Ideally, according to Foster and others, society would find ways to mitigate the problems caused by rigid school and work schedules.
All creatures need sleep
Researchers have recently discovered that fossilized plants living more than 250 million years ago - just as dinosaurs were starting to appear - already had circadian rhythms that drove them to fold their leaves at night and reopen them during the day.

All animals sleep, but it can look widely different depending on the species. According to a Boston University database of the sleep characteristics of 133 mammalian species, red kangaroos sleep for just under two hours in a 24-hour period, while armadillos and bats can sleep for nearly 20 hours. Some animals, including dolphins and whales, sleep unihemispherically – one half of the brain sleeps at a time to allow them to be constantly alert.
Hollow dots show species that sleep with one half of the brain resting while the other remains alert
Bottlenose Dolphin
Dolphins need to breathe the air on the surface, so can't fall into deep sleep like humans because they would drown
Unihemispheric sleep allows dolphins to control their breath and be aware of predators
After two to four hours dolphin swaps the sleeping side
What happens when we sleep
Sleep itself has cycles, in which the brain and body move through phases, marked by varying brain activity. In the deepest phases of sleep, the brain waves are slowest. The lighter phases have more rapid bursts of activity.

Our most intense dreams usually happen during Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep, when brain activity, breathing, heart rate, and blood pressure all increase, the eyes move rapidly, and muscles are limp. Scientists believe dreams in REM and non-REM sleep have different content – the more vivid or bizarre dreams usually happen during REM stages.
During sleep, the brain is extremely active. In a typical night, different regions become engaged as we move through the four main stages of sleep.


